## Activity 3.3.1 Air Pollution Core Activity

---

## Air Pollution Basics

### Sulfur Pollutants

Sulfur pollutants mainly consist of Sulfur Dioxide (SO<sub>2</sub>), Hydrogen Sulphide (H<sub>2</sub>S), and Sulfur Oxides (SO<sub>x</sub>). 
Pollution from sulfur can have multiple affects on the environment, including impaired visibility due to hazing (Freedman 2018), 
as well as health issue respiratory issues for people with asthma and damage plant life (US EPA 2022).
Sulfur pollution was a particularly large issue for people back in the beginning of the industrial revolution, as power was
largely generated from coal, however even today most of the 150 million tonnes of SO<sub>2</sub> pollution occur from fossil fuel combustion (Freedman 2018).
Other natural sources of sulfur pollution are volcanoes, however on average they emit around 12 million tonnes of sulphur gasses
per year (Freedman 2018).

### Nitrogen Pollutants

Nitrogen Pollutants occur from many different types of nitrogen gasses, including Nitric Oxide (NO), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO<sub>2</sub>), 
Nitrous Oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O), and Ammonia (NH<sub>3</sub>), NO and NO<sub>2</sub> are combined to the term NOX (Freedman 2018).
Ammonia (NH<sub>3</sub>) emmissions are mostly natural, with 1.2 billion tonnes stemming from the decomposition of dead biomass, NH<sub>3</sub> is
eventually converted to Nitrate after seven days (Freedman 2018).
Nitrous Oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O) is also known as laughing gas, and can be used a mild anesthetic. 
Nitric Oxide and Nitrogen Dioxide, often referred together as NOX, have around 430 million tonnes of natural emissions per year
due to bacterial dentrification, as well as 83 million tonnes per year due to burning of fossil fuels (Freedman 2018).
Rarely are there any concentrations of Nitrogen gases that cause cause harm to human, however nitrogen gasses can lead to the 
production of ozone which is much more problematic. 

### Hydrocarbon and Volatile Organic Compound Pollutants

Hydrocarbons are a group of chemicals of various combinations of hydrogen and carbon atoms. 
Simple hydrocarbons are methane (CH<sub>4</sub>), most emissions of methane are natural as a product of fermentation of organic matter, or 
by products of fossil fuels, as well as gas produced by animals like cows and sheep (Freedman 2018). 
Volatile Organic Compounds can consist of elements like oxygen, nitrogen, and other light elements paired with hydrogen and carbon
and exist a gas, liquid or solids.
Atmospheric hydrocarbons that are no CH<sub>4</sub> are referred to as non-methane hydrocarbons, and are mainly composed of natural emissions.
Natural non-methane hydrocarbons are released from forests and vegetation, accounting for around 200 million tonnes per year.
Human contributions to non-methane hydrocarbons account for around 186 million tonnes per year, mostly stemming from unburned fuel
from vehicles and aircraft. 

## Comparison of Current AQI

AQI stands for Air Quality Index. It is a form of measurement to describe the air quality in relation to air pollution of an area.
The AQI monitors for ground level ozone, particle pollution, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide. 
The range of the AQI can go from green meaning air quality is satisfactory, to moderate where those with health risks may be affected,
all the way to maroon meaning hazardous to everyone.

| Location | Time of Day | AQI Current | AQI Forecast | PM<sub>2.5</sub> | O<sub>3</sub> |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
Liberty, PA (highest) | 10:00 AM | 171 | 102 | 171 | N/A\* |
Helotes, TX (where I live) | 9:00 AM | 30 | Good (<50) | 20 | 30 |
Los Angeles, CA | 7:00 AM | 47 | 46 | 47 | 9 |

<sup>Information provided from AirNow.gov</sup>

<sup>N/A\* - Information not available from AirNow.gov at given time</sup>

Liberty, PA shows the highest level on the AQI index compared to Los Angeles and Helotes, it also has the least amount of data availabel
to review.
Looking over the time line we are able to see PM<sub>2.5</sub> levels greatly spiked over norms causing a warning to unhealthy and sensitive groups.
The AQI forecast for Liberty appears to greatly reduce back into the green zone over the next few days, we can use that data to
postulate that an event occurred in the area outside of area norms to cause the spike. 

Meanwhile both Los Angeles and Helotes are both in the green zones of AQI, indicating that across all level that are measured to
generate a AQI are within satisfactory levels. 
We are able to look over forecasted data to see that levels will remain in the green or satisfactory zone, meaning the areas are not
subject to any environmental or man made pollution to cause an elevated risk.

## Comparison of Current PM<sub>2.5</sub>/O<sub>3</sub>

PM<sub>2.5</sub> refers to particulate matter that is 2.5 microns or less in width, a micron is a measurement that represents 1/25000th of an inch.
These tiny particulates are able to cause short term effects like eye, nose and throat irritation (NY DOH 2018). 
PM<sub>2.5</sub> can also exacerbate existing health issues like asthma.

O<sub>3</sub> is ozone and exists within 2 levels, the stratosphere and the troposphere (ground level ozone).
Ozone is naturally present in the stratosphere and plays a part in protecting the planet from solar radiation (Freeman 2018).
However, ground level ozone can pose serious risks to vegetation and human.
O<sub>3</sub> can cause diminished photosynthesis in plants and cause respiratory issues for humans (Freeman 2018). 


|National Standard | San Antonio Current measured over 1 hour | Time of Day |
|---|---|---|
PM<sub>2.5</sub> Average Measured of 24 hours - 25 &mu;/m3 | 4.0 &mu;/m3 | 4:25 PM |
O<sub>3</sub> Average measured over 8 hours - 70 ppb (137 &mu;/m3) | 42 ppb | 4:25 PM |

<sup>Information provided by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality</sup>

#### references
AirNow, [www.AirNow.gov](https://www.airnow.gov)

Sulfur Dioxide Basics. US EPA, 9 Mar. 2022, [www.epa.gov/so2-pollution/sulfur-dioxide-basics.](https://www.epa.gov/so2-pollution/sulfur-dioxide-basics)

Fine Particles (PM 2.5) Questions and Answers., NY Department of Health, 2022, [health.ny.gov](www.health.ny.gov/environmental/indoors/air/pmq_a.htm)

Freedman, B. (2018). Environmental science: A Canadian perspective. Halifax, Canada: Dalhousie University Libraries

Texas Commision on Environmental Quality, 2022, [tceq.texas.gov/](https://www.tceq.texas.gov/cgi-bin/compliance/monops/select_curlev.pl?user_param=88502)
