## Activity 3.2.3 – Alternative Energy - Wind Energy

---

### What is alternative energy?

Alternative energy is a term that is generally used interchangeably with renewable energy. Renewable energy is considered to be
alternative to the norm as industrialized nations generally do not rely on them as their main source of energy.

### Arguments for alternative energy

Nearly all types of alternative energy are directly or indirectly powered by the sun, making their source of power nearly limitless
on a human scale. 
Alternative energy can also have the benefit of by vastly more flexible and scalable than traditional power plants. 
Alternatives like solar, wind, and tidal energy sources allow for energy generation to happen closed to the communities they serve
while also allowing those communities to scale energy generation sources over time rather than building one large power plant
when more energy is needed.

### Advantages and disadvantages of wind energy

Wind energy, harnessed through wind turbines provides many excellent advantages over traditional and alternative energy sources.
Wind is generated as a result of the sun heating the atmosphere, meaning wind as a energy source is nearly unlimited.
However unlike solar energy that directly uses the sun as a means of power generation, wind energy from turbines are able to generate
power during the day and night, so long as there is wind to drive the blades of the turbine.
Wind turbines also have one of the smaller footprints, and one of the best potential for energy produced per square foot of space used.
This means that they are well suited to scale up in vast quantities in dedicated wind farms, or can integrate themselves into
farm fields to supplement farmers without having a large impact on useful land.
Wind farms can be set up in areas that generally produce more wind, like on top of mountains or even along coastal waters.

However, there are downsides to wind turbines that prevent them from being a complete replacement for power production.
Since wind turbines require wind to work, logically, anytime there is no wind there will not be any energy production happening.
Even so, there are times where there can be too much wind to prevent wind turbines from being safely operated.
For example extreme weather events like storms or hurricanes can produce wind speeds that are too high for wind turbines to operate
and must be shutdown.
Another disadvantage to wind turbines is that the blades of the turbines are often made with composite materials, like fiberglass,
carbon fiber, or kevlar.
These materials help make the blades lighter and stronger, however once they are damaged beyond repair-ability or have outlasted 
their lifecycle, they are no able to be easily recycled into other uses or reprocessed into newer blades.

#### references

Mutiti, S., Mutiti, C., Manoylov, K., VandeVoort, A., & Bennett, D. (2018). Introduction to environmental science (3rd ed.). 
Biological Science Open Textbooks. University System of Georgia.

Energy (2017), How Do Wind Turbines Survive Severe Storms?, https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/how-do-wind-turbines-survive-severe-storms

iberdrola.com, What is a wind turbine and how does it work?, https://www.iberdrola.com/sustainability/wind-turbines-blades
