## Activity 2.1 - Atmosphere: Reduce Northwest Vista College’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions

---

## The problem

Hypothetically for this assignment, Northwest Vista College has asked me how to reduce their the college's net greenhouse gas
emissions, indirectly or directly. 
I am going to focus on 2 potential solutions, one will focus on the short term direct
contribution of greenhouse gases, and the other will focus on the long term indirect reduction that the college can persue.

## Short term sollution, reduce driving to campus by shifting on-campus classes to online classes

One uncomfortable truth to living in San Antonio is that if you want to functionally traverse the large land area of the city,
you are eventually going to need to get your own personal car. 
With Northwest Vista located on the outer edge near 1604, we can assume most of the students traveling to the campus are doing
so in their own car. 
EERE estimates that that more than 76% of vehicle trips are less than 10 miles [1], meanwhile, the EPA estimates that the 
average passenger vehicle emits around 404 grams of CO2 [2], meaning an average trip in a passenger vehicle generated up to 
4.04 kilograms of CO2 per trip.

I was not able to find any sort of statistics on how many students are on campus on average, but I was able to find that there are 
3,859 full time students enrolled at Northwest Vista College, with 14,683 are considered to be part time students [3].
While it's probable that not all full time students attend classes at campus, or making daily visits to the campus; it is equally
likely that there will be a minority percentage of part time students making a visit to the campus on any given day.
I'm going to, for argument sake, estimate that 70% of full time students are on campus on any given day, and I'm going to estimate
that 15% of part time students are on campus at any given day. 
Those numbers are very likely to to not be near what the actual on-campus attendance of students on any given day, but we will 
keep that in mind and only use it as a comparison to reducing on-campus trips.

So if we use 4.04 kg of CO2 per average trip, estimate that around 4,900 students are on-campus everyday, likely traveling
there by car, we can estimate that every day students generate about 13,114.49 kg of CO2. 
If we ignore holiday breaks and between semester classes, that equates to roughly 2,360.6 metric tons of CO2 per year.
If we were able to reduce on average 1 day of travel for each student per week, that would amount to a 20% reduction in CO2 
generated from driving, or a reduce of CO2 by 472 metric tons of CO2.

So then the easiest way to reduce CO2 contributions from students traveling to campus, is to remove or reduce the need
for students to travel to campus. While it might be infeasible to migrate all students or classes to an online class, a list of 
suggestions to reduce the trips required would be as follows:

1. Reduce class meeting days, ideally to 3 or fewer meetings per week.
2. Convert on-campus classes to hybrid on-campus/online classes where appropriate.
3. Help optimize student schedules to maximize class attendance in as few trips as possible.
4. Migrate students over to online only classes where appropriate.

These suggestions were all made as they focus on changes the Northwest Vista College administration can implement without a large
impact on budget, and can start to be put into practice as early as next semester.

## Long term solution

A long term solution for Northwest Vista College is to invest in solar generation onsite, reducing the need for grid provided
power where the college has no control over the power generation methods. 
From November 2021, ERCOT's source of power generation consisted of 51% from natural gas, and 13.4% from coal [4], I'm going to 
ignore the remaining power generation methods since they don't produce any meaningful CO2 compared to natural gas and coal.
Natural gas produces around .91 pounds of CO2 per kWh, and coal produces around 2.23 pounds per kWh [5].
Factoring in their percentage of contribution and converting to metric, every kWh of energy provided by the energy grid comes at
cost of producing 337.88 g of CO2. 

I was unable to find any statistical data for Northwest Vista's electricity usage, but I was able to find Palo Alto College 
electricity usage from 2017, which reported 7,266,484 kWh of electric consumption for the 2017 fiscal year [6].
Both colleges are of a similar footprint in land area, so I'm going to use Palo Alto's numbers as Northwest Vista's for 
an example.

Using the estimated grams of CO2 produced per kWh of ERCOT provided electricity, and Palo Alto College's energy usage, we can
estimate that Northwest Vista would generate somewhere around 2455.206 metric tons of CO2 per year. 

Northwest Vista already has solar panels installed on top of their parking garage structure, with a system size of 219 kw.
However, many of the buildings on the campus have yet to be fit with solar panels.
Should Northwest Vista increase their onsite solar generation to average around 20,000 kWh of electricity, they could become
energy neutral and significantly reduce the CO2 contributions made on their behalf to generate the power needed.


### Sources
[1] https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passenger-vehicle

[2] https://www.energy.gov/eere/vehicles/articles/fotw-1042-august-13-2018-2017-nearly-60-all-vehicle-trips-were-less-six-miles

[3] https://datausa.io/profile/university/northwest-vista-college#enrollment_status

[4] https://www.ercot.com/files/docs/2021/11/23/ERCOT%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf

[5] https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=74&t=11

[6] http://pacweb.alamo.edu/SACSinterim/submission/documents/10956.pdf
