## Activity 3.1 – Human Population

---

| Country Name | Birth Rate | Death Rate | Pop Growth Rate | Infant Mortality Rate | Life Expectancy (Total/Male/Female) | Fertility Rate | % Age <15 | % Age >65 | GNI |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Findland | 8 | 10 | -0.1 | 1.8 | T=82 M=79 F=84 | 1.4 | 43 | 3 | 51,650 |
| Burundi | 36 | 6 | 3.0 | 40 | T=67 M=65 F=69 | 5.2 | 16 | 23 | 780 |

One of the striking differences between a more developed country and a lesser developed country revolves around birth rates.
Many factory can lead to an inflated or deflated birthrate, however as humans we tend to trend toward a carrying capacity for their
environment, also called a K level.
Humans have a good survivorship, meaning the majority of the population tends to fare well in death until reaching life expectancy.
In Burundi's case we see wildly different numbers when compared to Finland, with a birth rate over 4x as much and  average life
expectancy of 15 years less.
With Burundi's birth rate at 36, you can determine they have not reached their carrying capacity for their region, however also
factoring in their infant mortality rate of 42 and a you can make a reasonable assumption that there are additional factors at play.
For example a high mortality rate can be indicative of under developed, or unaccessible health care.
Additional factors that could lead to lower life expectancy and higher infant mortality rates could be density independent, such as
natural disasters that the region is unable to cope with, as well as political or regional conflicts.
Finally Burundi's Gross National Income(GNI) at 780 is one of the lowest compared to the rest of the world, which reinforces that
that resources, especially wealth are extremely limited to the country.
Overall this paints a very clear picture of a very underdeveloped country; one where a limited access to health care means women
who give birth to a large amount of children only to lose many in the first year, with a low life expectancy for those who do
survive, and very limited economic mobility due to some of the lowest GNI out there.

Comparatively, Finland low birth rate coupled with their decreasing Population Growth Rate show that it has found an equalibrium
as is now maintaining that K level.
Finland's Infant Mortality rate is also very small, sitting at just 1.8. 
This is not just small when compared to Burundi, but also all that are to be considered more developed who average 4.
This leads to a more health age structure of the population, with population characters like 16% under 15 and 23% over 65, which 
lines up better with a type 1 survivorship. 
Burundi's survivorship on the other hand, had a population 43% under 15 and just 3% over 65, almost indicating a type 2 or 3 survivorship.
In summary, Finalands high GNI can be indicative of a better economy that is more able to provide better health care to a large 
number of it's citizens; this has the result of less infant deaths, a healthier population with a longer life expectancy, which feeds
into lower birthrates as population has settled on a population equilibrium.


### references
U.S. Census Bureau. (2018). International database. International Programs. https://www.census.gov/data-tools/demo/idb/informationGateway.php

Population Reference Bureau. (2021). 2021 world population data sheet. [2021-World-Pop Data-Sheet.pdf](https://alamo.instructure.com/courses/1450893/files/197277310?wrap=1)

Mutiti, S., Mutiti, C., Manoylov, K., VandeVoort, A., & Bennett, D. (2018). Introduction to environmental science (3rd ed.). Biological Science Open Textbooks. University System of Georgia.

